[DX-978] Improved-URL-rewrite (#3943)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/url-rewrite-middleware.md

---
title: URL Rewrite middleware
date: 2024-01-16
description: "Detail of the URL Rewrite middleware"
tags: ["URL rewrite", "middleware", "per-endpoint", "rewrite trigger", "rewrite rule"]
---

Tyk's [URL rewrite]({{< ref "transform-traffic/url-rewriting" >}}) middleware uses the concepts of [triggers](#url-rewrite-triggers) and [rules](#url-rewrite-rules) to determine if the request (target) URL should be modified. These can be combined in flexible ways to create sophisticated logic to direct requests made to a single endpoint to various upstream services (or other APIs internally exposed within Tyk through [looping]({{< ref "advanced-configuration/transform-traffic/looping" >}})).

> ## URL rewrite rules

Author: I've ordered it Rules before Triggers because in order to explain what a Trigger does, you have to know what a rule is... but not vice versa. I'd prefer to leave it as-is.

---
title: URL Rewrite middleware
date: 2024-01-16
description: "Detail of the URL Rewrite middleware"
tags: ["URL rewrite", "middleware", "per-endpoint", "rewrite trigger", "rewrite rule"]
---

> ## Overview

Author: ```suggestion
```

Tyk's [URL rewrite]({{< ref "transform-traffic/url-rewriting" >}}) middleware uses the concepts of [triggers](#url-rewrite-triggers) and [rules](#url-rewrite-rules) to determine if the request (target) URL should be modified. These can be combined in flexible ways to create sophisticated logic to direct requests made to a single endpoint to various upstream services (or other APIs internally exposed within Tyk through [looping]({{< ref "advanced-configuration/transform-traffic/looping" >}})).

## URL rewrite rules
The URL rewrite middleware compares a [key](#key) with a [pattern](#pattern) to determine if there is a match; the rules define the location of the key and the structure of the pattern.

#### Key

> The key value is the content of a field in some element of the request; as such each key has a location (which element of the request) and a name (the name of the field within that element). For example, to obtain the key value `book` from the request `GET /asset?type=book` the key location would be `query parameter` and the key name would be `type`.

Author: ```suggestion
Each key has a _location_ (which indicates an element of the request),  most also have a _name_ (the name of the field within that element); the key value is the content of that field. For example, given the request `GET /asset?type=book&condition=new` if key _location_ is `query parameter` and the key _name_ is `type`, the key value would be `book`.
```

Keys can be located in the following elements of the request:

>  - request path / path parameter (i.e. components of the path itself)

Author: We're documenting the behaviour, not defining it.

 - request header
 - query parameter
 - request body (payload)
 - session metadata
 - request context (for example to match by IP address or JWT scope)

> Note that there is no key name when using the request body location, as the entire body (payload) of the request is used as the key value.

Author: I don't think this is required and might just lead to bloating of the content on the page. Would appreciate opinions from other reviewers.

When using the request header location, the key name is the normalised form of the header name: with capitalisation and use of `-` as separator. For example, the header name`customer_identifier` would be identified in a rule via the key name `Customer-Identifier`.

When using the request path location, you can use wildcards in the key name (which is the URL path) - for example `/asset/{type}/author/`. The URL rewrite middleware will treat the wildcard as a `(.*)` regex so that any value matches. The wildcard value itself will be ignored, is not extracted from the key, and is not available for use in constructing the [rewrite path](#creating-the-rewrite-path).

#### Pattern
The pattern takes the form of a regular expression (regex) against which the key value will be compared.

This pattern can be a static regex or can contain dynamic variables:
 - [Context variables]({{< ref "/context-variables" >}}), extracted from the request at the start of the middleware chain, can be injected into the pattern regex using the `$tyk_context.` namespace

>    - Note that you need to enable context variables for the API to be able to access them from the URL rewrite middleware

Author: I'm consistent: there's no full stop on any of the other bullet points.
Is Tyk style to ensure that all bullets are full sentences complete with full stop?

>    - Note that you need to enable context variables for the API to be able to access them from the URL rewrite middleware

Author: ```suggestion
```

Moving this to a "note" box

 - [Session metadata]({{< ref "getting-started/key-concepts/session-meta-data" >}}), from the Tyk Session Object linked to the request, can be injected into the pattern regex using the `$tyk_meta.METADATA_KEY` namespace 

> 

Author: ```suggestion

{{< note success >}}
**Note**  

When using Tyk Classic APIs, you must enable context variables for the API to be able to access them from the URL rewrite middleware. When using Tyk OAS APIs, the context variables are always available to the URL rewriter.
{{< /note >}}

```

>  - [Session metadata]({{< ref "/getting-started/key-concepts/session-meta-data" >}}), from the Tyk Session Object linked to the request, can be injected into the pattern regex using the `$tyk_meta.METADATA_KEY` namespace 

Author: ```suggestion
 - [Session metadata]({{< ref "getting-started/key-concepts/session-meta-data" >}}), from the Tyk Session Object linked to the request, can be injected into the pattern regex using the `$tyk_meta.METADATA_KEY` namespace 
```

Percent-encoded (URL-encoded) characters can be used in the pattern regex when the key is the request path or path parameter
 - If the middleware is called with percent-encoded characters in the key, matching will first be attempted using the raw URL as provided
 - If there is no match, the percent-encoded characters will be replaced with their non-encoded form (e.g. `%2D` -> `-`) and checked again
 
{{< note success >}}
**Note** 

Tyk does not check all combinations of encoded and decoded characters in the same string (so `my-test%2Durl` will only be checked as `my-test%2Durl` and `my-test-url`, it will not be checked against `my%2Dtest%2Durl` or `my%2Dtest-url`).
{{< /note >}}

## URL rewrite triggers
There are two types of trigger in the URL rewriter: basic and advanced.

#### Basic trigger
The basic trigger has a single rule for which the key location is always the request path. For the simplest case of URL rewriting, you can simply configure the `pattern` regex and `rewriteTo` target URL for this basic trigger.

> #### Advanced triggers

Author: No! The structure of these docs is deliberate: we now have two different API Definitions with different field names and ways to configure the middleware. We cannot have example APIDefs or screenshots here - they are not required if the explanation is good enough. Later I would like to bring in the content team to add some imagery, however don't have time right now.

One or more advanced triggers can be configured alongside the basic trigger. These are processed in the order that they are defined in the API Definition. When using the API Designer in Tyk Dashboard, advanced triggers are automatically numbered in the order they are created and will be processed in numberical order.

Advanced triggers can have multiple rules that can be combined using a logical AND or OR operation, such that either `all` the rules must pass or `any` rule must pass for the trigger to fire.

> Within advanced triggers, but not the basic trigger, each rule can be negated such that the rule is considered to have passed if the pattern does not match the key value.

Author: It means that the rule is "true" if the pattern does NOT match the key value.

Once an advanced trigger has fired, the middleware will apply its `rewriteTo` target and stop processing any more triggers. 

{{< note success >}}
**Note** 

The basic trigger acts as a control switch for any advanced triggers that are defined for the middleware: if the basic trigger is not fired then no rewriting will take place even if an advanced trigger would have fired based on the request.
{{< /note >}}

## Creating the rewrite path

> Each trigger (basic or advanced) defines a `rewriteTo` target.

Author: I don't think it's necessary for just three options, then I think we'd need the table AND an explanation of the table. There are examples in the sub-pages for Tyk Classic and Tyk OAS.

 - If just the basic trigger is fired, then the request path (target URL) will be rewritten with the `rewriteTo` value defined in that trigger.
 - If both an advanced trigger and the basic trigger are fired, then the request path will be written with the `rewriteTo` value defined for the advanced trigger.
 - If the basic trigger does not fire then no rewriting will take place.

The `rewriteTo` values can be simple URLs or they can be dynamically created using data available to the middleware, such as context variables which can be referenced using the `$tyk_context.` namespace.

{{< note success >}}
**Note** 

You can redirect to a new hostname, but to do so you *must* specify the transport, e.g.
```
https://my-new-target-host.com/library/service?value1=books&value2=author
```
{{< /note >}}

> 

Author: Again, I'm not sure these are required and might just add to the visual clutter.

For the basic trigger, each capture group you specify in the pattern regex is designated with an index (`n`), and can then be referenced in the `rewriteTo` target using the format `$n`.

>  - For example, if the `pattern` to be matched is `""(\w+)/(\w+)"` then the regex will attempt to capture two word groups. The first of these will be given index 1 and the second will be index 2. You can reference these in the `rewriteTo` target using `$1` and `$2` such as: `"my/service?value1=$1&value2=$2"`

Author: That will be covered in the Tyk Classic/Tyk OAS sub-pages.

>  - For example, if the `pattern` to be matched is `""(\w+)/(\w+)"` then the regex will attempt to capture two word groups. The first of these will be given index 1 and the second will be index 2. You can reference these in the `rewriteTo` target using `$1` and `$2` such as: `"my/service?value1=$1&value2=$2"`

Author: I don't know if this is necessary - I feel it's just going to add bloat: this page is intended to explain the workings of the middleware (which is independent of whether it's Tyk Classic or Tyk OAS).

---
title: URL Rewrite middleware
date: 2024-01-16
description: "Detail of the URL Rewrite middleware"
tags: ["URL rewrite", "middleware", "per-endpoint", "rewrite trigger", "rewrite rule"]
---

> ## Overview

Reviewer: Remove H2 heading so have page title, intro paragraph and section headings

Author: The reason for this is that it then appears in the right hand menu for easy navigation within the page

Author: Understood - thanks for the guidance, I'll remove these from this and the other PRs.

When using the request path location, you can use wildcards in the key name (which is the URL path) - for example `/asset/{type}/author/`. The URL rewrite middleware will treat the wildcard as a `(.*)` regex so that any value matches. The wildcard value itself will be ignored, is not extracted from the key, and is not available for use in constructing the [rewrite path](#creating-the-rewrite-path).

#### Pattern
The pattern takes the form of a regular expression (regex) against which the key value will be compared.

This pattern can be a static regex or can contain dynamic variables:
 - [Context variables]({{< ref "context-variables" >}}), extracted from the request at the start of the middleware chain, can be injected into the pattern regex using the `$tyk_context.` namespace
 - [Session metadata]({{< ref "getting-started/key-concepts/session-meta-data" >}}), from the Tyk Session Object linked to the request, can be injected into the pattern regex using the `$tyk_meta.METADATA_KEY` namespace 

{{< note success >}}

> **Note**  

Author: ```suggestion
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> When using Tyk Classic APIs, you must enable context variables for the API to be able to access them from the URL rewrite middleware. When using Tyk OAS APIs, the context variables are always available to the URL rewriter.

Author: This is actually only relevant to Tyk Classic APIs, so I'll move the note to the appropriate sub-page.

> When using Tyk Classic APIs, you must enable context variables for the API to be able to access them from the URL rewrite middleware. When using Tyk OAS APIs, the context variables are always available to the URL rewriter.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> {{< /note >}}

Author: ```suggestion
```
